docs/docsite/rst/playbook_guide/playbooks_handlers.rst, before:

.. _handlers:

Handlers: running operations on change
======================================

Sometimes you want a task to run only when a change is made on a machine. For example, you may want to restart a service if a task updates the configuration of that service, but not if the configuration is unchanged. Ansible uses handlers to address this use case. Handlers are tasks that only run when notified.

.. contents::
   :local:

Handler example
---------------

This playbook, ``verify-apache.yml``, contains a single play with a handler.

.. code-block:: yaml

    ---
    - name: Verify apache installation
      hosts: webservers
      vars:
        http_port: 80
        max_clients: 200
      remote_user: root
      tasks:
        - name: Ensure apache is at the latest version
          ansible.builtin.yum:
            name: httpd
            state: latest

        - name: Write the apache config file
          ansible.builtin.template:
            src: /srv/httpd.j2
            dest: /etc/httpd.conf
          notify:
            - Restart apache

        - name: Ensure apache is running
          ansible.builtin.service:
            name: httpd
            state: started

      handlers:
        - name: Restart apache
          ansible.builtin.service:
            name: httpd
            state: restarted

In this example playbook, the Apache server is restarted by the handler after all tasks are completed in the play.


Notifying handlers
------------------

Tasks can instruct one or more handlers to execute using the ``notify`` keyword. The ``notify`` keyword can be applied to a task and accepts a list of handler names that are notified on a task change. Alternatively, a string containing a single handler name can be supplied as well. The following example demonstrates how multiple handlers can be notified by a single task:

.. code-block:: yaml

    tasks:
    - name: Template configuration file
      ansible.builtin.template:
        src: template.j2
        dest: /etc/foo.conf
      notify:
        - Restart apache
        - Restart memcached

    handlers:
      - name: Restart memcached
        ansible.builtin.service:
          name: memcached
          state: restarted

      - name: Restart apache
        ansible.builtin.service:
          name: apache
          state: restarted

In the above example, the handlers are executed on task change in the following order: ``Restart memcached``, ``Restart apache``. Handlers are executed in the order they are defined in the ``handlers`` section, not in the order listed in the ``notify`` statement. Notifying the same handler multiple times will result in executing the handler only once regardless of how many tasks notify it. For example, if multiple tasks update a configuration file and notify a handler to restart Apache, Ansible only bounces Apache once to avoid unnecessary restarts.


Notifying and loops
-------------------

Tasks can use loops to notify handlers. This is particularly useful when combined with variables to trigger multiple dynamic notifications.

Note that the handlers are triggered if the task as a whole is changed. When a loop is used the changed state is set if any of the loop items are changed.  That is, any change triggers all of the handlers.

.. code-block:: yaml

    tasks:
    - name: Template services
      ansible.builtin.template:
        src: "{{ item }}.j2"
        dest: /etc/systemd/system/{{ item }}.service
      # Note: if *any* loop iteration triggers a change, *all* handlers are run
      notify: Restart {{ item }}
      loop:
        - memcached
        - apache

    handlers:
      - name: Restart memcached
        ansible.builtin.service:
          name: memcached
          state: restarted

      - name: Restart apache
        ansible.builtin.service:
          name: apache
          state: restarted

In the above example both memcached and apache will be restarted if either template file is changed, neither will be restarted if no file changes.


Naming handlers
---------------

Handlers must be named in order for tasks to be able to notify them using the ``notify`` keyword.

Alternatively, handlers can utilize the ``listen`` keyword. Using this handler keyword, handlers can listen on topics that can group multiple handlers as follows:

.. code-block:: yaml

    tasks:
      - name: Restart everything
        command: echo "this task will restart the web services"
        notify: "restart web services"

    handlers:
      - name: Restart memcached
        service:
          name: memcached
          state: restarted
        listen: "restart web services"

      - name: Restart apache
        service:
          name: apache
          state: restarted
        listen: "restart web services"

Notifying the ``restart web services`` topic results in executing all handlers listening to that topic regardless of how those handlers are named.

This use makes it much easier to trigger multiple handlers. It also decouples handlers from their names, making it easier to share handlers among playbooks and roles (especially when using third-party roles from a shared source such as Ansible Galaxy).

Each handler should have a globally unique name. If multiple handlers are defined with the same name, only the last one loaded into the play can be notified and executed, effectively shadowing all of the previous handlers with the same name.

There is only one global scope for handlers (handler names and listen topics) regardless of where the handlers are defined. This also includes handlers defined in roles.

Controlling when handlers run
-----------------------------

By default, handlers run after all the tasks in a particular play have been completed. Notified handlers are executed automatically after each of the following sections, in the following order: ``pre_tasks``, ``roles``/``tasks`` and ``post_tasks``. This approach is efficient, because the handler only runs once, regardless of how many tasks notify it. For example, if multiple tasks update a configuration file and notify a handler to restart Apache, Ansible only bounces Apache once to avoid unnecessary restarts.

If you need handlers to run before the end of the play, add a task to flush them using the :ref:`meta module <meta_module>`, which executes Ansible actions:

.. code-block:: yaml

    tasks:
      - name: Some tasks go here
        ansible.builtin.shell: ...

      - name: Flush handlers
        meta: flush_handlers

      - name: Some other tasks
        ansible.builtin.shell: ...

The ``meta: flush_handlers`` task triggers any handlers that have been notified at that point in the play.

Once handlers are executed, either automatically after each mentioned section or manually by the ``flush_handlers`` meta task, they can be notified and run again in later sections of the play.

Defining when tasks change
--------------------------

You can control when handlers are notified about task changes using the ``changed_when`` keyword.

In the following example, the handler restarts the service each time the configuration file is copied:

.. code-block:: yaml

    tasks:
      - name: Copy httpd configuration
        ansible.builtin.copy:
          src: ./new_httpd.conf
          dest: /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf
        # The task is always reported as changed
        changed_when: True
        notify: Restart apache

See :ref:`override_the_changed_result` for more about ``changed_when``.

Using variables with handlers
-----------------------------

You may want your Ansible handlers to use variables. For example, if the name of a service varies slightly by distribution, you want your output to show the exact name of the restarted service for each target machine. Avoid placing variables in the name of the handler. Since handler names are templated early on, Ansible may not have a value available for a handler name like this:

.. code-block:: yaml+jinja

    handlers:
    # This handler name may cause your play to fail!
    - name: Restart "{{ web_service_name }}"

If the variable used in the handler name is not available, the entire play fails. Changing that variable mid-play **will not** result in newly created handler.

Instead, place variables in the task parameters of your handler. You can load the values using ``include_vars`` like this:

.. code-block:: yaml+jinja

    tasks:
      - name: Set host variables based on distribution
        include_vars: "{{ ansible_facts.distribution }}.yml"

    handlers:
      - name: Restart web service
        ansible.builtin.service:
          name: "{{ web_service_name | default('httpd') }}"
          state: restarted

While handler names can contain a template, ``listen`` topics cannot.


Handlers in roles
-----------------

Handlers from roles are not just contained in their roles but rather inserted into the global scope with all other handlers from a play. As such they can be used outside of the role they are defined in. It also means that their name can conflict with handlers from outside the role. To ensure that a handler from a role is notified as opposed to one from outside the role with the same name, notify the handler by using its name in the following form: ``role_name : handler_name``.

Handlers notified within the ``roles`` section are automatically flushed at the end of the ``tasks`` section but before any ``tasks`` handlers.


Includes and imports in handlers
--------------------------------
Notifying a dynamic include such as ``include_task`` as a handler results in executing all tasks from within the include. It is not possible to notify a handler defined inside a dynamic include.

Having a static include such as ``import_task`` as a handler results in that handler being effectively rewritten by handlers from within that import before the play execution. A static include itself cannot be notified; the tasks from within that include, on the other hand, can be notified individually.


Meta tasks as handlers
----------------------

Since Ansible 2.14 :ansplugin:`meta tasks <ansible.builtin.meta#module>` are allowed to be used and notified as handlers. Note that however ``flush_handlers`` cannot be used as a handler to prevent unexpected behavior.


Limitations
-----------

A handler cannot run ``import_role`` nor ``include_role``.
Handlers :ref:`ignore tags <tags_on_handlers>`.

Commit message:

Clarify handlers insertion order (#2359)
* Clarify handlers insertion order

* Update docs/docsite/rst/playbook_guide/playbooks_handlers.rst

Co-authored-by: Sloane Hertel <19572925+s-hertel@users.noreply.github.com>

---------

Co-authored-by: Sloane Hertel <19572925+s-hertel@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/docsite/rst/playbook_guide/playbooks_handlers.rst, after:

.. _handlers:

Handlers: running operations on change
======================================

Sometimes you want a task to run only when a change is made on a machine. For example, you may want to restart a service if a task updates the configuration of that service, but not if the configuration is unchanged. Ansible uses handlers to address this use case. Handlers are tasks that only run when notified.

.. contents::
   :local:

Handler example
---------------

This playbook, ``verify-apache.yml``, contains a single play with a handler.

.. code-block:: yaml

    ---
    - name: Verify apache installation
      hosts: webservers
      vars:
        http_port: 80
        max_clients: 200
      remote_user: root
      tasks:
        - name: Ensure apache is at the latest version
          ansible.builtin.yum:
            name: httpd
            state: latest

        - name: Write the apache config file
          ansible.builtin.template:
            src: /srv/httpd.j2
            dest: /etc/httpd.conf
          notify:
            - Restart apache

        - name: Ensure apache is running
          ansible.builtin.service:
            name: httpd
            state: started

      handlers:
        - name: Restart apache
          ansible.builtin.service:
            name: httpd
            state: restarted

In this example playbook, the Apache server is restarted by the handler after all tasks are completed in the play.


Notifying handlers
------------------

Tasks can instruct one or more handlers to execute using the ``notify`` keyword. The ``notify`` keyword can be applied to a task and accepts a list of handler names that are notified on a task change. Alternatively, a string containing a single handler name can be supplied as well. The following example demonstrates how multiple handlers can be notified by a single task:

.. code-block:: yaml

    tasks:
    - name: Template configuration file
      ansible.builtin.template:
        src: template.j2
        dest: /etc/foo.conf
      notify:
        - Restart apache
        - Restart memcached

    handlers:
      - name: Restart memcached
        ansible.builtin.service:
          name: memcached
          state: restarted

      - name: Restart apache
        ansible.builtin.service:
          name: apache
          state: restarted

In the above example, the handlers are executed on task change in the following order: ``Restart memcached``, ``Restart apache``. Handlers are executed in the order they are defined in the ``handlers`` section, not in the order listed in the ``notify`` statement. Notifying the same handler multiple times will result in executing the handler only once regardless of how many tasks notify it. For example, if multiple tasks update a configuration file and notify a handler to restart Apache, Ansible only bounces Apache once to avoid unnecessary restarts.


Notifying and loops
-------------------

Tasks can use loops to notify handlers. This is particularly useful when combined with variables to trigger multiple dynamic notifications.

Note that the handlers are triggered if the task as a whole is changed. When a loop is used the changed state is set if any of the loop items are changed.  That is, any change triggers all of the handlers.

.. code-block:: yaml

    tasks:
    - name: Template services
      ansible.builtin.template:
        src: "{{ item }}.j2"
        dest: /etc/systemd/system/{{ item }}.service
      # Note: if *any* loop iteration triggers a change, *all* handlers are run
      notify: Restart {{ item }}
      loop:
        - memcached
        - apache

    handlers:
      - name: Restart memcached
        ansible.builtin.service:
          name: memcached
          state: restarted

      - name: Restart apache
        ansible.builtin.service:
          name: apache
          state: restarted

In the above example both memcached and apache will be restarted if either template file is changed, neither will be restarted if no file changes.


Naming handlers
---------------

Handlers must be named in order for tasks to be able to notify them using the ``notify`` keyword.

Alternatively, handlers can utilize the ``listen`` keyword. Using this handler keyword, handlers can listen on topics that can group multiple handlers as follows:

.. code-block:: yaml

    tasks:
      - name: Restart everything
        command: echo "this task will restart the web services"
        notify: "restart web services"

    handlers:
      - name: Restart memcached
        service:
          name: memcached
          state: restarted
        listen: "restart web services"

      - name: Restart apache
        service:
          name: apache
          state: restarted
        listen: "restart web services"

Notifying the ``restart web services`` topic results in executing all handlers listening to that topic regardless of how those handlers are named.

This use makes it much easier to trigger multiple handlers. It also decouples handlers from their names, making it easier to share handlers among playbooks and roles (especially when using third-party roles from a shared source such as Ansible Galaxy).

Each handler should have a globally unique name. If multiple handlers are defined with the same name, only the last one loaded into the play (see `handlers_insertion_order`_) can be notified and executed, effectively shadowing all of the previous handlers with the same name.

.. _handlers_insertion_order:

Handler insertion order into the play
--------------------------------------

There is only one global, play-level scope for handlers regardless of where the handlers are defined, either in the ``handlers:`` section or in roles. The order in which handlers are added into the play is as follows:

#. Handlers from roles in the ``roles:`` section.

#. Handlers from the ``handlers:`` section.

#. Handlers from roles statically imported via ``import_role`` tasks.

#. Handlers from roles dynamically included via ``include_role`` tasks (available at runtime only after the ``include_role`` task executed).

In case handlers having the same name the last one loaded into the play, as per the above order, can be notified and executed.

Controlling when handlers run
-----------------------------

By default, handlers run after all the tasks in a particular play have been completed. Notified handlers are executed automatically after each of the following sections, in the following order: ``pre_tasks``, ``roles``/``tasks`` and ``post_tasks``. This approach is efficient, because the handler only runs once, regardless of how many tasks notify it. For example, if multiple tasks update a configuration file and notify a handler to restart Apache, Ansible only bounces Apache once to avoid unnecessary restarts.

If you need handlers to run before the end of the play, add a task to flush them using the :ref:`meta module <meta_module>`, which executes Ansible actions:

.. code-block:: yaml

    tasks:
      - name: Some tasks go here
        ansible.builtin.shell: ...

      - name: Flush handlers
        meta: flush_handlers

      - name: Some other tasks
        ansible.builtin.shell: ...

The ``meta: flush_handlers`` task triggers any handlers that have been notified at that point in the play.

Once handlers are executed, either automatically after each mentioned section or manually by the ``flush_handlers`` meta task, they can be notified and run again in later sections of the play.

Defining when tasks change
--------------------------

You can control when handlers are notified about task changes using the ``changed_when`` keyword.

In the following example, the handler restarts the service each time the configuration file is copied:

.. code-block:: yaml

    tasks:
      - name: Copy httpd configuration
        ansible.builtin.copy:
          src: ./new_httpd.conf
          dest: /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf
        # The task is always reported as changed
        changed_when: True
        notify: Restart apache

See :ref:`override_the_changed_result` for more about ``changed_when``.

Using variables with handlers
-----------------------------

You may want your Ansible handlers to use variables. For example, if the name of a service varies slightly by distribution, you want your output to show the exact name of the restarted service for each target machine. Avoid placing variables in the name of the handler. Since handler names are templated early on, Ansible may not have a value available for a handler name like this:

.. code-block:: yaml+jinja

    handlers:
    # This handler name may cause your play to fail!
    - name: Restart "{{ web_service_name }}"

If the variable used in the handler name is not available, the entire play fails. Changing that variable mid-play **will not** result in newly created handler.

Instead, place variables in the task parameters of your handler. You can load the values using ``include_vars`` like this:

.. code-block:: yaml+jinja

    tasks:
      - name: Set host variables based on distribution
        include_vars: "{{ ansible_facts.distribution }}.yml"

    handlers:
      - name: Restart web service
        ansible.builtin.service:
          name: "{{ web_service_name | default('httpd') }}"
          state: restarted

While handler names can contain a template, ``listen`` topics cannot.


Handlers in roles
-----------------

Handlers from roles are not just contained in their roles but rather inserted into the global scope with all other handlers from a play. As such they can be used outside of the role they are defined in. It also means that their name can conflict with handlers from outside the role. To ensure that a handler from a role is notified as opposed to one from outside the role with the same name, notify the handler by using its name in the following form: ``role_name : handler_name``.

Handlers notified within the ``roles`` section are automatically flushed at the end of the ``tasks`` section.


Includes and imports in handlers
--------------------------------
Notifying a dynamic include such as ``include_task`` as a handler results in executing all tasks from within the include. It is not possible to notify a handler defined inside a dynamic include.

Having a static include such as ``import_task`` as a handler results in that handler being effectively rewritten by handlers from within that import before the play execution. A static include itself cannot be notified; the tasks from within that include, on the other hand, can be notified individually.


Meta tasks as handlers
----------------------

Since Ansible 2.14 :ansplugin:`meta tasks <ansible.builtin.meta#module>` are allowed to be used and notified as handlers. Note that however ``flush_handlers`` cannot be used as a handler to prevent unexpected behavior.


Limitations
-----------

A handler cannot run ``import_role`` nor ``include_role``.
Handlers :ref:`ignore tags <tags_on_handlers>`.
